Python_Data_Analytics_C03
==========================

CHAPTER 3

The NumPy Library

NumPy is a basic package for scientific computing with Python and especially for data analysis. In fact, this 
library is the basis of a large amount of mathematical and scientific Python packages, and among them, as you will 
see later in the book, is the pandas library. This library, specialized for data analysis, is fully developed using 
the concepts introduced by NumPy. In fact, the built-in tools provided by the standard Python library could be too 
simple or inadequate for most of the calculations in data analysis.

Having knowledge of the NumPy library is important to being able to use all scientific Python packages, and 
particularly, to use and understand the pandas library. The pandas library is the main subject of the following 
chapters.

If you are already familiar with this library, you can proceed directly to the next chapter; otherwise you can view 
this chapter as a way to review the basic concepts or to regain familiarity with it by running the examples in this 
chapter.

NumPy: A Little History

At the dawn of the Python language, the developers needed to perform numerical calculations, especially when this 
language was being used by the scientific community.

The first attempt was Numeric, developed by Jim Hugunin in 1995, which was followed by an alternative package 
called Numarray. Both packages were specialized for the calculation of arrays, and each had strengths depending on 
in which case they were used. Thus, they were used differently depending on the circumstances. This ambiguity led 
then to the idea of unifying the two packages. Travis Oliphant started to develop the NumPy library for this 
purpose. Its first release (v 1.0) occurred in 2006.

From that moment on, NumPy proved to be the extension library of Python for scientific computing, and it is 
currently the most widely used package for the calculation of multidimensional arrays and large arrays. In 
addition, the package comes with a range of functions that allow you to perform operations on arrays in a highly 
efficient way and perform high-level mathematical calculations.

Currently, NumPy is open source and licensed under BSD. There are many contributors who have expanded the potential 
of this library. At present, NumPy has arrived at release 1.24. As you can see in Figure 3-1, this library is in 
continuous development, with approximately one release every six months.

Figure 3-1. NumPy releases in the last five years, with the new NumPy logo [CC BY-SA 4.0 Isabela Presedo-Floyd]

The NumPy Installation

This library doesn’t have any requirements except that you have a Python platform to run on, so installing it 
shouldn’t cause any problems. Generally, this module is present as a basic package in most Python distributions; 
however, if not, you can install it later.

However, regardless of the platform you are using, as with all the other libraries that you will use throughout the 
book, it is also recommended for NumPy to use the platform of the Anaconda distribution. This allows you to cleanly 
manage the NumPy installation aspect, as well as easily create and manage the virtual environments on which to 
install it. In this way, it is possible to test and develop your code with different Python versions and NumPy 
releases without having to uninstall and reinstall everything each time.

If you have Anaconda, just write the following to install NumPy:

conda install numpy

If instead you want to work without the support of this distribution, use the command-line pip command to install 
the NumPy library (see https://pypi.org/project/numpy/):

pip install numpy

Once NumPy is installed on your distribution, to import the NumPy module in your Python session, write the 
following:

>>> import numpy as np

If, on the other hand, you are writing code, in order to access NumPy and its functions, you have to insert this 
instruction at the beginning of the Python code.


ndarray: The Heart of the Library

The NumPy library is based on one main object: ndarray (which stands for N-dimensional array). This object is a 
multidimensional, homogeneous array with a predetermined number of items: homogeneous because virtually all the 
items in it are of the same type and the same size. In fact, the data type is specified by another NumPy object 
called dtype (data-type); each ndarray is associated with only one type of dtype.

The number of the dimensions and items in an array is defined by its shape, a tuple of N-positive integers that 
specifies the size for each dimension. The dimensions are defined as axes and the number of axes as rank.

Moreover, another peculiarity of NumPy arrays is that their size is fixed, that is, once you define their size at 
the time of creation, it remains unchanged. This behavior is different from Python lists, which can grow or shrink 
in size.

The easiest way to define a new ndarray is to use the array() function, passing a Python list containing the 
elements to be included in it as an argument.

>>> a = np.array([1, 2, 3])

>>> a

array([1, 2, 3])

You can easily check that a newly created object is an ndarray by passing the new variable to the type() function.

>>> type(a) <class 'numpy.ndarray'>

In order to know the associated dtype to the newly created ndarray, you have to use the dtype attribute.

■ Note the result of dtype, shape, and other attributes can vary among different operating systems and python 
distributions.

>>> a.dtype dtype('int32')

The just-created array has one axis, and then its rank is 1, while its shape should be (3,1). To obtain these 
values from the corresponding array, it is sufficient to use the ndim attribute for getting the axes, the size 
attribute to determine the array length, and the shape attribute to get its shape.

>>> a.ndim 1

>>> a.size 3

>>> a.shape (3,)

What you have just seen is the simplest case of a one-dimensional array. But the use of arrays can be easily 
extended to several dimensions. For example, if you define a two-dimensional array 2x2:

>>> b = np.array([[1.3, 2.4],[0.3, 4.1]])

>>> b

array([[1.2, 2.4], [0.3, 3. ]])

>>> b.dtype

dtype('float64')

>>> b.ndim 2

>>> b.size 4

>>> b.shape (2, 2)

This array has rank 2, since it has two axes, each of length 2.

Another important attribute is itemsize, which can be used with ndarray objects. It defines the size in bytes of 
each item in the array, and data is the buffer containing the actual elements of the array. This second attribute 
is still not generally used, because to access the data in the array you use the indexing mechanism, which you will 
see in the next sections.

>>> b.itemsize 8

>>> b.data

<memory at 0x000001A8AD526A80>

Create an Array

To create a new array, you can follow different paths. The most common path is the one you saw in the previous 
section through a list or sequence of lists as arguments to the array() function.

>>> c = np.array([[1, 2, 3],[4, 5, 6]])

>>> c array([[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6]])

The array() function, in addition to lists, can accept tuples and sequences of tuples.

>>> d = np.array(((1, 2, 3),(4, 5, 6)))

>>> d

array([[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6]])

It can also accept sequences of tuples and interconnected lists.

>>> e = np.array([(1, 2, 3), [4, 5, 6], (7, 8, 9)])

>>> e array([[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6], [7, 8, 9]])


Types of Data

So far you have seen only simple integer and float numeric values, but NumPy arrays are designed to contain a wide 
variety of data types (see Table 3-1). For example, you can use the data type string:

>>> g = np.array([['a', 'b'],['c', 'd']])

>>> g array([['a', 'b'],

['c', 'd']], dtype='<U1')>>> g.dtype

dtype('<U1') >>> g.dtype.name 'str32'

Table 3-1. Data Types Supported by NumPy

Data Type

bool_ int_

intc intp int8 int16 int32 int64

uint8 uint16 uint32 uint64 float_ float16 float32 float64 complex_ complex64 complex128

Description

Boolean (true or false) stored as a byte Signed integer type (same as C long and Python int; normally either int64 
or int32 depending on the platform) Signed integer type, identical to C int (normally int32 or int64) Integer used 
for indexing (same as C size_t; normally either int32 or int64) Alias for the signed integer type with 8 bits (–128 
to 127) Alias for the signed integer type with 16 bits (–32768 to 32767) Alias for the signed integer type with 32 
bits (–2147483648 to 2147483647) Alias for the signed integer type with 64 bits (–9223372036854775808 to 
9223372036854775807) Alias for the unsigned integer type with 8 bits (0 to 255) Alias for the unsigned integer type 
with 16 bits (0 to 65535) Alias for the unsigned integer type with 32 bits (0 to 4294967295) Alias for the unsigned 
integer type with 64 bits (0 to 18446744073709551615) Shorthand for float64 Half precision float: sign bit, 5-bit 
exponent, 10-bit mantissa Single precision float: sign bit, 8-bit exponent, 23-bit mantissa Double precision float: 
sign bit, 11-bit exponent, 52-bit mantissa Shorthand for complex128 Complex number, represented by two 32-bit 
floats (real and imaginary components) Complex number, represented by two 64-bit floats (real and imaginary 
components)

49 Chapter 3 ■ the Numpy Library

The dtype Option

The array() function does not accept a single argument. You have seen that each ndarray object is associated with a 
dtype object that uniquely defines the type of data that will occupy each item in the array. By default, the 
array() function can associate the most suitable type according to the values contained in the sequence of lists or 
tuples. Actually, you can explicitly define the dtype using the dtype option as an argument of the function.

For example, if you want to define an array with complex values, you can use the dtype option as follows:

>>> f = np.array([[1, 2, 3],[4, 5, 6]], dtype=complex)

>>> f

array([[ 1.+0.j, 2.+0.j, 3.+0.j], [ 4.+0.j, 5.+0.j, 6.+0.j]])

Intrinsic Creation of an Array

The NumPy library provides a set of functions that generate ndarrays with initial content, created with different 
values depending on the function. Throughout the chapter, and throughout the book, you’ll discover that these 
features will be very useful. In fact, they allow a single line of code to generate large amounts of data.

The zeros() function, for example, creates a full array of zeros with dimensions defined by the shape of the 
argument. For example, to create a two-dimensional array 3x3, you can use:

>>> np.zeros((3, 3)) array([[ 0., 0., 0.], [ 0., 0., 0.], [ 0., 0., 0.]])

While the ones() function creates an array full of ones in a very similar way.

>>> np.ones((3, 3)) array([[ 1., 1., [ 1., 1., [ 1., 1.,

1.],

1.],

1.]])

By default, the two functions created arrays with the float64 data type. A feature that is particularly useful is 
arange(). This function generates NumPy arrays with numerical sequences that respond to particular rules depending 
on the passed arguments. For example, if you want to generate a sequence of values between 0 and 10, you will be 
passed only one argument to the function—the value with which you want to end the sequence.

>>> np.arange(0, 10) array([0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9])

If instead of starting from 0 you want to start from another value, you simply specify two arguments: the first is 
the starting value and the second is the final value.

>>> np.arange(4, 10) array([4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9])

It is also possible to generate a sequence of values with precise intervals between them. If the third argument of 
the arange() function is specified, this will represent the gap between one value and the next one in the sequence 
of values.

>>> np.arange(0, 12, 3) array([0, 3, 6, 9])

In addition, this third argument can also be a float.

>>> np.arange(0, 6, 0.6) array([ 0. , 0.6, 1.2,

1.8, 2.4,

3. ,

3.6, 4.2,

4.8, 5.4])

So far you have only created one-dimensional arrays. To generate two-dimensional arrays, you can still continue to 
use the arange() function but combined with the reshape() function. This function divides a linear array in 
different parts in the manner specified by the shape argument.

>>> np.arange(0, 12).reshape(3, 4) array([[ 0, 1, 2, 3], [ 4, 5, 6, 7], [ 8, 9, 10, 11]])

Another function very similar to arange() is linspace(). This function still takes as its first two arguments the 
initial and end values of the sequence, but the third argument, instead of specifying the distance between one 
element and the next, defines the number of elements into which you want the interval to be split.

>>> np.linspace(0,10,5) array([ 0. , 2.5,

5. ,

7.5, 10. ])

Finally, another method to obtain arrays already containing values is to fill them with random values. This is 
possible using the random() function of the numpy.random module. This function will generate an array with as many 
elements as specified in the argument.

>>> np.random.random(3) array([ 0.78610272, 0.90630642,

0.80007102])

The numbers obtained will vary with every run. To create a multidimensional array, you simply pass the size of the 
array as an argument.

>>> np.random.random((3,3)) array([[ 0.07878569, 0.7176506 , [ 0.82919021, 0.80349121, [ 0.93347404, 0.65868278,

Basic Operations

0.05662501],

0.30254079],

0.37379618]])

So far you have seen how to create a new NumPy array and how items are defined in it. Now it is the time to see how 
to apply various operations to these arrays.


Arithmetic Operators

The first operations that you will perform on arrays are the arithmetic operators. The most obvious are adding and 
multiplying an array by a scalar.

>>> a = np.arange(4)

>>> a

array([0, 1, 2, 3])

>>> a+4

array([4, 5, 6, 7])

>>> a*2

array([0, 2, 4, 6])

These operators can also be used between two arrays. In NumPy, these operations are element-wise, that is, the 
operators are applied only between corresponding elements. These objects occupy the same position, so that the end 
result is a new array containing the results in the same location of the operands (see Figure 3-2).

>>> b = np.arange(4,8)

>>> b

array([4, 5, 6, 7])

>>> a + b

array([ 4, 6, 8, 10])

>>> a – b

array([–4, –4, –4, –4])

>>> a * b

array([ 0, 5, 12, 21])

Figure 3-2. Element-wise addition

Moreover, these operators are also available for functions, provided that the value returned is a NumPy array. For 
example, you can multiply the array by the sine or the square root of the elements of array b.

>>> a * np.sin(b)

array([–0. , –0.95892427, –0.558831 ,

>>> a * np.sqrt(b)

array([ 0. , 2.23606798, 4.89897949,

1.9709598 ])

7.93725393])

Moving on to the multidimensional case, even here the arithmetic operators continue to operate element-wise.

>>> A = np.arange(0, 9).reshape(3, 3)

>>> A

array([[0, 1, 2],

[3, 4, 5], [6, 7, 8]])

>>> B = np.ones((3, 3))

>>> B

array([[ 1., 1., 1.],

[ 1., 1., 1.], [ 1., 1., 1.]])

>>> A * B

array([[ 0., 1., 2.],

[ 3., 4., 5.], [ 6., 7., 8.]])

The Matrix Product

The choice of operating element-wise is a peculiar aspect of the NumPy library. In fact, in many other tools for 
data analysis, the * operator is understood as a matrix product when it is applied to two matrices. Using NumPy, 
this kind of product is instead indicated by the dot() function. This operation is not element-wise.

>>> np.dot(A,B) array([[ 3., [ 12., [ 21.,

3., 3.],

12., 12.],

21., 21.]])

The result at each position is the sum of the products of each element of the corresponding row of the first matrix 
with the corresponding element of the corresponding column of the second matrix. Figure 3-3 illustrates the process 
carried out during the matrix product (run for two elements).

Figure 3-3. Calculating matrix elements as a result of a matrix product

An alternative way to write the matrix product is to use the dot() function as an object’s function of one of the 
two matrices.

>>> A.dot(B) array([[ 3., [ 12., [ 21.,

3., 3.],

12., 12.],

21., 21.]])

Note that because the matrix product is not a commutative operation, the order of the operands is important. 
Indeed, A * B is not equal to B * A.

>>> np.dot(B,A) array([[ 9., [ 9., [ 9.,

12., 15.],

12., 15.],

12., 15.]])

Increment and Decrement Operators

Actually, there are no such operators in Python, because there are no operators called ++ or ––. To increase or 
decrease values, you have to use operators such as += and –=. These operators are not different from ones you saw 
earlier, except that instead of creating a new array with the results, they reassign the results to the same array.

>>> a = np.arange(4)

>>> a

array([0, 1, 2, 3])

>>> a += 1

>>> a array([1, 2, 3, 4])

>>> a –= 1

>>> a array([0, 1, 2, 3])

Therefore, using these operators is much more extensive than the simple incremental operators that increase the 
values by one unit, and they can be applied in many cases. For instance, you need them every time you want to 
change the values in an array without generating a new array.

>>> a += 4

>>> a array([4, 5, 6, 7])

>>> a *= 2

>>> a array([ 8, 10, 12, 14])

Universal Functions (ufunc)

A universal function, generally called ufunc, is a function operating on an array in an element-by-element fashion. 
This means that it acts individually on each single element of the input array to generate a corresponding result 
in a new output array. In the end, you obtain an array of the same size as the input.

There are many mathematical and trigonometric operations that meet this definition; for example, calculating the 
square root with sqrt(), the logarithm with log(), or the sin with sin().

>>> a = np.arange(1, 5)

>>> a

array([1, 2, 3, 4])

>>> np.sqrt(a)

array([ 1. , 1.41421356,

>>> np.log(a)

array([ 0. , 0.69314718,

>>> np.sin(a)

array([ 0.84147098, 0.90929743,

1.73205081, 2.

])

1.09861229, 1.38629436])

0.14112001, –0.7568025 ])

Many common math functions are already implemented in the NumPy library.

Aggregate Functions

Aggregate functions perform an operation on a set of values, an array for example, and produce a single result. 
Therefore, the sum of all the elements in an array is an aggregate function. Many functions of this kind are 
implemented in the ndarray class and so can be invoked directly from the array on which you want to perform the 
calculation.

>>> a = np.array([3.3, 4.5, 1.2, 5.7, 0.3])

>>> a.sum()

15.0

>>> a.min()

0.3

>>> a.max()

5.7

>>> a.mean()

3.0

>>> a.std()

2.0079840636817816

Indexing, Slicing, and Iterating

In the previous sections, you saw how to create an array and how to perform operations on it. In this section, you 
see how to manipulate these objects. You learn how to select elements through indexes and slices, in order to 
obtain the values contained in them or to make assignments in order to change their values. Finally, you also see 
how you can make iterations within them.

Indexing

Array indexing always uses square brackets ([ ]) to index the elements of the array so that the elements can then 
be referred individually for various uses, such as extracting a value, selecting items, or even assigning a new 
value.

When you create a new array, an appropriate scale index is also automatically created (see Figure 3-4).

Figure 3-4. Indexing a monodimensional ndarray

In order to access a single element of an array, you can refer to its index.

>>> a = np.arange(10, 16)

>>> a

array([10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15])

>>> a[4] 14

The NumPy arrays also accept negative indexes. These indexes have the same incremental sequence from 0 to –1, –2, 
and so on, but in practice they cause the final element to move gradually toward the initial element, which is the 
one with the more negative index value.

>>> a[–1] 15

>>> a[–6] 10

To select multiple items at once, you can pass an array of indexes in square brackets.

>>> a[[1, 3, 4]] array([11, 13, 14])

Moving on to the two-dimensional case, namely the matrices, they are represented as rectangular arrays consisting 
of rows and columns, defined by two axes, where axis 0 is represented by the rows and axis 1 is represented by the 
columns. Thus, indexing in this case is represented by a pair of values: the first value is the index of the row 
and the second is the index of the column. Therefore, if you want to access the values or select elements in the 
matrix, you still use square brackets, but this time there are two values [row index, column index] (see Figure 
3-5).


Figure 3-5. Indexing a two-dimensional array

>>> A = np.arange(10, 19).reshape((3, 3))

>>> A

array([[10, 11, 12],

[13, 14, 15], [16, 17, 18]])

If you want to remove the element of the third column in the second row, you have to insert the pair [1, 2].

>>> A[1, 2] 15

Slicing

Slicing allows you to extract portions of an array to generate new arrays. When you use the Python lists to slice 
arrays, the resulting arrays are copies, but in NumPy, the arrays are views of the same underlying buffer.

Depending on the portion of the array that you want to extract (or view), you must use the slice syntax; that is, 
you use a sequence of numbers separated by colons (:) within square brackets.

If you want to extract a portion of the array, for example one that goes from the second to the sixth element, you 
have to insert the index of the starting element, that is 1, and the index of the final element, that is 5, 
separated by a colon (:).

>>> a = np.arange(10, 16)

>>> a

array([10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15])

>>> a[1:5]

array([11, 12, 13, 14])

Now if you want to extract an item from the previous portion and skip a specific number of following items, then 
extract the next and skip again, you can use a third number that defines the gap in the sequence of the elements. 
For example, with a value of 2, the array will take the elements in an alternating fashion.

>>> a[1:5:2] array([11, 13])

57 Chapter 3 ■ the Numpy Library

To better understand the slice syntax, you also should look at cases where you do not use explicit numerical 
values. If you omit the first number, NumPy implicitly interprets this number as 0 (i.e., the initial element of 
the array). If you omit the second number, this will be interpreted as the maximum index of the array; and if you 
omit the last number, this will be interpreted as 1. All the elements will be considered without intervals.

>>> a[::2]

array([10, 12, 14])

>>> a[:5:2]

array([10, 12, 14])

>>> a[:5:]

array([10, 11, 12, 13, 14])

In the case of a two-dimensional array, the slicing syntax still applies, but it is separately defined for the rows 
and columns. For example, if you want to extract only the first row:

>>> A = np.arange(10, 19).reshape((3, 3))

>>> A

array([[10, 11, 12],

[13, 14, 15], [16, 17, 18]])

>>> A[0,:]

array([10, 11, 12])

As you can see in the second index, if you leave only the colon without defining a number, you will select all the 
columns. Instead, if you want to extract all the values of the first column, you have to write the inverse.

>>> A[:,0] array([10, 13, 16])

Instead, if you want to extract a smaller matrix, you need to explicitly define all intervals with indexes that 
define them.

>>> A[0:2, 0:2] array([[10, 11], [13, 14]])

If the indexes of the rows or columns to be extracted are not contiguous, you can specify an array of indexes.

>>> A[[0,2], 0:2] array([[10, 11], [16, 17]])


Iterating an Array

In Python, iterating the items in an array is really very simple; you just need to use the for construct.

>>> for i in a: ... print(i) ...

10 11 12 13 14 15

Of course, even here, moving to the two-dimensional case, you could think of applying the solution of two nested 
loops with the for construct. The first loop will scan the rows of the array, and the second loop will scan the 
columns. Actually, if you apply the for loop to a matrix, it will always perform a scan according to the first 
axis.

>>> for row in A: ... print(row) ...

[10 11 12] [13 14 15] [16 17 18]

If you want to make an iteration element by element, you can use the following construct, using the for loop on 
A.flat.

>>> for item in A.flat: ... print(item) ...

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18

However, despite all this, NumPy offers an alternative and more elegant solution than the for loop. Generally, you 
need to apply an iteration to apply a function on the rows, on the columns, or on an individual item. If you want 
to launch an aggregate function that returns a value calculated for every single column or for every single row, 
there is an optimal way that leaves it to NumPy to manage the iteration: the apply_along_axis() function.

This function takes three arguments: the aggregate function, the axis on which to apply the iteration, and the 
array. If the axis option equals 0, then the iteration evaluates the elements column by column, whereas if axis 
equals 1 then the iteration evaluates the elements row by row. For example, you can calculate the average values 
first by column and then by row.

>>> np.apply_along_axis(np.mean, axis=0, arr=A) array([ 13., 14., 15.])

>>> np.apply_along_axis(np.mean, axis=1, arr=A) array([ 11., 14., 17.])

The previous case uses a function already defined in the NumPy library, but nothing prevents you from defining your 
own functions. You also used an aggregate function. However, nothing forbids you from using an ufunc. In this case, 
iterating by column and by row produces the same result. In fact, using a ufunc performs one iteration 
element-by-element.

>>> def foo(x): ... return x/2 ...

>>> np.apply_along_axis(foo, axis=1, arr=A) array([[5., 5.5, 6. ], [6.5, 7., 7.5], [8., 8.5, 9. ]])

>>> np.apply_along_axis(foo, axis=0, arr=A) array([[5., 5.5, 6.], [6.5, 7., 7.5], [8., 8.5, 9.]])

As you can see, the ufunc function halves the value of each element of the input array, regardless of whether the 
iteration is performed by row or by column.

Conditions and Boolean Arrays

So far you have used indexing and slicing to select or extract a subset of an array. These methods use numerical 
indexes. An alternative way to selectively extract the elements in an array is to use the conditions and Boolean 
operators.

Suppose you wanted to select all the values that are less than 0.5 in a 4x4 matrix containing random numbers 
between 0 and 1.

>>> A = np.random.random((4, 4))

>>> A

array([[ 0.03536295, 0.0035115 , [ 0.21264709, 0.17121982, [ 0.77116263, 0.04523647, [ 0.86964585, 0.6470581 ,

0.54742404, 0.68960999],

0.81090212, 0.43408927],

0.84632378, 0.54450749],

0.42582897, 0.22286282]])

Once a matrix of random numbers is defined, if you apply an operator condition, you will receive as a return value 
a Boolean array containing true values in the positions in which the condition is satisfied. In this example, that 
is all the positions in which the values are less than 0.5.

>>> A < 0.5 array([[ True, True, False, False], [ True, True, False, True], [False, True, False, False], [False, 
False, True, True]], dtype=bool)

Actually, the Boolean arrays are used implicitly for making selections of parts of arrays. In fact, by inserting 
the previous condition directly inside the square brackets, you can extract all elements smaller than 0.5, so as to 
obtain a new array.

>>> A[A < 0.5] array([ 0.03536295, 0.0035115 , 0.04523647, 0.42582897,

Shape Manipulation

0.21264709, 0.17121982,

0.22286282])

0.43408927,

You already saw, when creating a two-dimensional array, that it is possible to convert a one-dimensional array into 
a matrix, thanks to the reshape() function.

>>> a = np.random.random(12)

>>> a

array([ 0.77841574, 0.39654203,

0.78115866, 0.96019214,

0.41894881, 0.73581471])

>>> A = a.reshape(3, 4)

>>> A

array([[ 0.77841574, 0.39654203, [ 0.27519705, 0.78115866, [ 0.52008642, 0.10862692,

0.38188665, 0.26704305,

0.59328414, 0.52008642,

0.38188665, 0.26704305],

0.96019214, 0.59328414],

0.27519705,

0.10862692,

0.41894881, 0.73581471]])

The reshape() function returns a new array and can therefore create new objects. However, if you want to modify the 
object by modifying the shape, you have to assign a tuple containing the new dimensions directly to its shape 
attribute.

>>> a.shape = (3, 4)

>>> a

array([[ 0.77841574, [ 0.27519705, [ 0.52008642,

0.39654203, 0.38188665,

0.78115866, 0.96019214,

0.10862692, 0.41894881,

0.26704305],

0.59328414],

0.73581471]])

As you can see, this time it is the starting array that changes shape and no object is returned. The inverse 
operation is also possible; that is, you can convert a two-dimensional array into a one-dimensional array. You do 
this by using the ravel() function.

>>> a = a.ravel()

>>> a

array([ 0.77841574, 0.39654203,

0.78115866, 0.96019214,

0.41894881, 0.73581471])

0.38188665, 0.26704305,

0.59328414, 0.52008642,

0.27519705,

0.10862692,

61 Chapter 3 ■ the Numpy Library

Or you can even act directly on the shape attribute of the array itself.

>>> a.shape = (A.size)

>>> a

array([ 0.77841574, 0.39654203,

0.78115866, 0.96019214,

0.41894881, 0.73581471])

0.38188665, 0.26704305,

0.59328414, 0.52008642,

0.27519705,

0.10862692,

Another important operation is transposing a matrix, which is inverting the columns with the rows. NumPy provides 
this feature with the transpose() function.

>>> A.transpose() array([[ 0.77841574, [ 0.39654203, [ 0.38188665, [ 0.26704305,

0.27519705, 0.52008642],

0.78115866, 0.10862692],

0.96019214, 0.41894881],

0.59328414, 0.73581471]])

Array Manipulation

Often you need to create an array using already created arrays. In this section, you see how to create new arrays 
by joining or splitting arrays that are already defined.

Joining Arrays

You can merge multiple arrays to form a new one that contains all of the arrays. NumPy uses the concept of 
stacking, providing a number of functions in this regard. For example, you can perform vertical stacking with the 
vstack() function, which combines the second array as new rows of the first array. In this case, the array grows in 
the vertical direction. By contrast, the hstack() function performs horizontal stacking; that is, the second array 
is added to the columns of the first array.

>>> A = np.ones((3, 3))

>>> B = np.zeros((3, 3))

>>> np.vstack((A, B)) array([[ 1., 1., 1.], [ 1., 1., 1.], [ 1., 1., 1.], [ 0., 0., 0.], [ 0., 0., 0.], [ 0., 0., 
0.]])

>>> np.hstack((A,B))

array([[ 1., 1., 1., 0., [ 1., 1., 1., 0., [ 1., 1., 1., 0.,

0., 0.],

0., 0.],

0., 0.]])

Two other functions performing stacking between multiple arrays are column_stack() and row_ stack(). These 
functions operate differently than the two previous functions. Generally these functions are used with 
one-dimensional arrays, which are stacked as columns or rows in order to form a new two-dimensional array.

>>> a = np.array([0, 1, 2])

>>> b = np.array([3, 4, 5])

>>> c = np.array([6, 7, 8])

>>> np.column_stack((a, b, c)) array([[0, 3, 6], [1, 4, 7], [2, 5, 8]])

>>> np.row_stack((a, b, c)) array([[0, 1, 2], [3, 4, 5], [6, 7, 8]])

Splitting Arrays

In the previous section, you saw how to assemble multiple arrays through stacking. Now you see how to divide an 
array into several parts. In NumPy, you use splitting to do this. Here too, you have a set of functions that work 
both horizontally with the hsplit() function and vertically with the vsplit() function.

>>> A = np.arange(16).reshape((4, 4))

>>> A

array([[ 0, 1, 2, 3],

[ 4, 5, 6, 7], [ 8, 9, 10, 11], [12, 13, 14, 15]])

Thus, if you want to split the array horizontally, meaning the width of the array is divided into two parts, the 
4x4 matrix A will be split into two 2x4 matrices.

>>> [B,C] = np.hsplit(A, 2)

>>> B

array([[ 0, 1],

[ 4, 5], [ 8, 9], [12, 13]])

>>> C

array([[ 2, 3],

[ 6, 7], [10, 11], [14, 15]])

Instead, if you want to split the array vertically, meaning the height of the array is divided into two parts, the 
4x4 matrix A will be split into two 4x2 matrices.

>>> [B,C] = np.vsplit(A, 2)

>>> B

array([[0, 1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6, 7]])

>>> C

array([[ 8, 9, 10, 11], [12, 13, 14, 15]])

63 Chapter 3 ■ the Numpy Library

A more complex command is the split() function, which allows you to split the array into nonsymmetrical parts. 
Passing the array as an argument, you also have to specify the indexes of the parts to be divided. If you use the 
axis = 1 option, then the indexes will be columns; if instead the option is axis = 0, then they will be row 
indexes.

For example, if you want to divide the matrix into three parts, the first of which will include the first column, 
the second will include the second and the third column, and the third will include the last column, you must 
specify three indexes in the following way.

>>> [A1,A2,A3] = np.split(A,[1,3],axis=1)

>>> A1

array([[ 0], [ 4], [ 8],

[12]])

>>> A2

array([[ 1, 2],

[ 5, 6], [ 9, 10], [13, 14]])

>>> A3

array([[ 3], [ 7],

[11],

[15]])

You can do the same thing by row.

>>> [A1,A2,A3] = np.split(A,[1,3],axis=0)

>>> A1

array([[0, 1, 2, 3]])

>>> A2

array([[ 4, 5, 6, 7], [ 8, 9, 10, 11]])

>>> A3

array([[12, 13, 14, 15]])

This feature also includes the functionalities of the vsplit() and hsplit() functions.

General Concepts

This section describes the general concepts underlying the NumPy library. The difference between copies and views 
is when they return values. The mechanism of broadcasting, which occurs implicitly in many NumPy functions, is also 
covered in this section.

Copies or Views of Objects

As you may have noticed with NumPy, especially when you are manipulating an array, you can return a copy or a view 
of the array. None of the NumPy assignments produces copies of arrays, nor any element contained in them.

>>> a = np.array([1, 2, 3, 4])

>>> b = a

>>> b array([1, 2, 3, 4])

>>> a[2] = 0

>>> b array([1, 2, 0, 4])

If you assign one array a to another array b, you are not copying it; array b is just another way to call array a. 
In fact, by changing the value of the third element of a, you change the third value of b too. When you slice an 
array, the object returned is a view of the original array.

>>> c = a[0:2]

>>> c array([1, 2])

>>> a[0] = 0

>>> c array([0, 2])

As you can see, even when slicing, you are actually pointing to the same object. If you want to generate a complete 
and distinct array, use the copy() function.

>>> a = np.array([1, 2, 3, 4])

>>> c = a.copy()

>>> c

array([1, 2, 3, 4])

>>> a[0] = 0

>>> c array([1, 2, 3, 4])

In this case, even when you change the items in array a, array c remains unchanged.

Vectorization

Vectorization, along with broadcasting, is the basis of the internal implementation of NumPy. Vectorization is the 
absence of an explicit loop during the development of the code. These loops actually cannot be omitted, but are 
implemented internally and then are replaced by other constructs in the code. The application of vectorization 
leads to more concise and readable code, and you can say that it will appear more “Pythonic” in its appearance. In 
fact, thanks to the vectorization, many operations take on a more mathematical expression. For example, NumPy 
allows you to express the multiplication of two arrays as shown:

a * b

Or even two matrices:

A * B

65 Chapter 3 ■ the Numpy Library

In other languages, such operations would be expressed with many nested loops and the for construct. For example, 
the first operation would be expressed in the following way:

for (i = 0; i < rows; i++){

c[i] = a[i]*b[i];

}

While the product of matrices would be expressed as follows:

for( i=0; i < rows; i++){

for(j=0; j < columns; j++){

c[i][j] = a[i][j]*b[i][j];

}

}

You can see that using NumPy makes the code more readable and more mathematical.

Broadcasting

Broadcasting allows an operator or a function to act on two or more arrays even if these arrays do not have the 
same shape. That said, not all the dimensions can be subjected to broadcasting; they must meet certain rules.

You saw that using NumPy, you can classify multidimensional arrays through a shape that is a tuple representing the 
length of the elements of each dimension.

Two arrays can be subjected to broadcasting when all their dimensions are compatible, i.e., the length of each 
dimension must be equal or one of them must be equal to 1. If neither of these conditions is met, you get an 
exception that states that the two arrays are not compatible.

>>> A = np.arange(16).reshape(4, 4)

>>> b = np.arange(4)

>>> A

array([[ 0, 1, 2, 3],

[ 4, 5, 6, 7], [ 8, 9, 10, 11], [12, 13, 14, 15]])

>>> b

array([0, 1, 2, 3])

In this case, you obtain two arrays:

4 x 4 4

There are two rules of broadcasting. First you must add a 1 to each missing dimension. If the compatibility rules 
are now satisfied, you can apply broadcasting and move to the second rule. For example:

4 x 4 4 x 1

66 Chapter 3 ■ the Numpy Library

The rule of compatibility is met. Then you can move to the second rule of broadcasting. This rule explains how to 
extend the size of the smallest array so that it’s the size of the biggest array, so that the element-wise function 
or operator is applicable.

The second rule assumes that the missing elements (size, length 1) are filled with replicas of the values contained 
in extended sizes (see Figure 3-6).

Figure 3-6. Applying the second broadcasting rule

Now that the two arrays have the same dimensions, the values inside may be added together.

>>> A + b array([[ 0, 2, 4, 6], [ 4, 6, 8, 10], [ 8, 10, 12, 14], [12, 14, 16, 18]])

This is a simple case in which one of the two arrays is smaller than the other. There may be more complex cases in 
which the two arrays have different shapes and each is smaller than the other only in certain dimensions.

>>> m = np.arange(6).reshape(3, 1, 2)

>>> n = np.arange(6).reshape(3, 2, 1)

>>> m

array([[[0, 1]],

[[2, 3]], [[4, 5]]])

>>> n

array([[[0],

[1]], [[2],

[3]], [[4],

[5]]])

Even in this case, by analyzing the shapes of the two arrays, you can see that they are compatible and therefore 
the rules of broadcasting can be applied.

3 x 1 x 2 3 x 2 x 1

67 Chapter 3 ■ the Numpy Library

In this case, both arrays undergo the extension of dimensions (broadcasting).

m* = [[[0,1],

n* = [[[0,0],

[0,1]], [[2,3], [2,3]], [[4,5], [4,5]]]

[1,1]], [[2,2], [3,3]], [[4,4], [5,5]]]

Then you can apply, for example, the addition operator between the two arrays, operating element-wise.

>>> m + n array([[[ 0, 1], [ 1, 2]], [[ 4, 5], [ 5, 6]], [[ 8, 9], [ 9, 10]]])

Structured Arrays

So far in the various examples in the previous sections, you saw monodimensional and two-dimensional arrays. NumPy 
allows you to create arrays that are much more complex not only in size, but in the structure, called structured 
arrays. This type of array contains structs or records instead of individual items.

For example, you can create a simple array of structs as items. Thanks to the dtype option, you can specify a list 
of comma-separated specifiers to indicate the elements that will constitute the struct, along with data type and 
order.

bytes int unsigned ints floats complex fixed length strings

b1 i1, i2, i4, i8 u1, u2, u4, u8 f2, f4, f8 c8, c16 a<n>

For example, if you want to specify a struct consisting of an integer, a character string of length 6, and a 
Boolean value, you specify the three types of data in the dtype option with the right order using the corresponding 
specifiers.

■ Note the result of dtype and other format attributes can vary among different operating systems and python 
distributions.

>>> structured = np.array([(1, 'First', 0.5, 1+2j),(2, 'Second', 1.3, 2-2j), (3, 'Third',

0.8, 1+3j)],dtype=('i2, a6, f4, c8'))

>>> structured

array([(1, b'First', 0.5, 1+2.j),

68 Chapter 3 ■ the Numpy Library

(2, b'Second', 1.3, 2.-2.j), (3, b'Third', 0.8, 1.+3.j)],

dtype=[('f0', '<i2'), ('f1', 'S6'), ('f2', '<f4'), ('f3', '<c8')])

You can also use the data type explicitly by specifying int8, uint8, float16, complex64, and so forth.

>>> structured = np.array([(1, 'First', 0.5, 1+2j),(2, 'Second', 1.3,2-2j), (3, 'Third',

0.8, 1+3j)],dtype=('

int16, a6, float32, complex64')) >>> structured array([(1, b'First', 0.5, 1.+2.j),

(2, b'Second', 1.3, 2.-2.j), (3, b'Third', 0.8, 1.+3.j)],

dtype=[('f0', '<i2'), ('f1', 'S6'), ('f2', '<f4'), ('f3', '<c8')])

Both cases have the same result. Inside the array, you see a dtype sequence containing the name of each item of the 
struct with the corresponding data type.

Writing the appropriate reference index, you obtain the corresponding row, which contains the struct.

>>> structured[1] (2, b'Second', 1.3, 2.-2.j)

The names that are assigned automatically to each item of the struct can be considered the names of the columns of 
the array. Using them as a structured index, you can refer to all the elements of the same type, or of the same 
column.

>>> structured['f1']

array([b'First', b'Second', b'Third'], dtype='|S6')

As you have just seen, the names are assigned automatically with an f (which stands for field) and a progressive 
integer that indicates the position in the sequence. In fact, it would be more useful to specify the names with 
something more meaningful. This is possible and you can do it at the time of array declaration:

>>> structured = np.array([(1,'First',0.5,1+2j),(2,'Second',1.3,2-2j),(3,'Third',0.8,1+3j)], dtype=[( 
'id','i2'),('position','a6'),('value','f4'),('complex','c8')])

>>> structured

array([(1, b'First', 0.5, 1.+2.j),

(2, b'Second', 1.3, 2.-2.j), (3, b'Third', 0.8, 1.+3.j)],

dtype=[('id', '<i2'), ('position', 'S6'), ('value', '<f4'), ('complex', '<c8')])

Or you can do it at a later time, redefining the tuples of names assigned to the dtype attribute of the structured 
array.

>>> structured.dtype.names = ('id','order','value','complex')

Now you can use meaningful names for the various field types:

>>> structured['order']

array([b'First', b'Second', b'Third'], dtype='|S6')

Reading and Writing Array Data on Files

A very important aspect of NumPy that has not been discussed yet is the process of reading data contained in a 
file. This procedure is very useful, especially when you have to deal with large amounts of data collected in 
arrays. This is a very common data analysis operation, since the size of the dataset to be analyzed is almost 
always huge, and therefore it is not advisable or even possible to manage it manually.

NumPy provides a set of functions that allow data analysts to save the results of their calculations in a text or 
binary file. Similarly, NumPy allows you to read and convert written data in a file into an array.

Loading and Saving Data in Binary Files

NumPy provides a pair of functions, called save() and load(), that enable you to save and then later retrieve data 
stored in binary format.

Once you have an array to save, for example, one that contains the results of your data analysis processing, you 
simply call the save() function and specify as arguments the name of the file and the array. The file will 
automatically be given the .npy extension.

>>> data = np.random.random((3,3))

>>> data

array([[0.47941017, 0.43759768, 0.76636206],

[0.51928993, 0.06358527, 0.72109914], [0.64501488, 0.94113659, 0.42052306]])

>>> np.save('saved_data',data)

When you need to recover the data stored in a .npy file, you use the load() function by specifying the file name as 
the argument, this time adding the .npy extension.

>>> loaded_data = np.load('saved_data.npy')

>>> loaded_data

array([[0.47941017, 0.43759768, 0.76636206],

[0.51928993, 0.06358527, 0.72109914], [0.64501488, 0.94113659, 0.42052306]])

Reading Files with Tabular Data

Many times, the data that you want to read or save are in textural format (TXT or CSV, for example).

You might save the data in this format, instead of binary, because the files can then be accessed outside 
independently if you are working with NumPy or with any other application. Take for example the case of a set of 
data in the CSV (Comma-Separated Values) format, in which data are collected in a tabular format and the values are 
separated by commas (see Listing 3-1).

Listing 3-1. ch3_data.csv

id,value1,value2,value3 1,123,1.4,23 2,110,0.5,18 3,164,2.1,19

70 Chapter 3 ■ the Numpy Library

To be able to read your data in a text file and insert values into an array, NumPy provides a function called 
genfromtxt(). Normally, this function takes three arguments—the name of the file containing the data, the character 
that separates the values from each other (in this case, a comma), and whether the data contain column headers.

>>> data = np.genfromtxt('ch3_data.csv', delimiter=',', names=True)

>>> data

array([(1.0, 123.0, 1.4, 23.0), (2.0, 110.0, 0.5, 18.0), (3.0, 164.0, 2.1, 19.0)],

dtype=[('id', '<f8'), ('value1', '<f8'), ('value2', '<f8'), ('value3', '<f8')])

As you can see from the result, you get a structured array in which the column headings have become the field 
names.

This function implicitly performs two loops: the first loop reads a line at a time, and the second loop separates 
and converts the values contained in it, inserting the consecutive elements created specifically. One positive 
aspect of this feature is that if some data are missing, the function can handle them.

Take for example the previous file (see Listing 3-2) with some items removed. Save it as data2.csv.

Listing 3-2. ch3_data2.csv

id,value1,value2,value3 1,123,1.4,23 2,110,,18 3,,2.1,19

Launching these commands, you can see how the genfromtxt() function replaces the blanks in the file with nan 
values.

>>> data2 = np.genfromtxt('ch3_data2.csv', delimiter=',', names=True)

>>> data2

array([(1.0, 123.0, 1.4, 23.0), (2.0, 110.0, nan, 18.0), (3.0, nan, 2.1, 19.0)],

dtype=[('id', '<f8'), ('value1', '<f8'), ('value2', '<f8'), ('value3', '<f8')])

At the bottom of the array, you can find the column headings contained in the file. These headers can be considered 
labels that act as indexes to extract the values by column.

>>> data2['id'] array([ 1., 2.,

3.])

Instead, by using the numerical indexes in the classic way, you extract data corresponding to the rows.

>>> data2[0] (1.0, 123.0, 1.4, 23.0)


Conclusions

In this chapter, you learned about all the main aspects of the NumPy library and became familiar with a range of 
features that form the basis of many other aspects you’ll face in the course of the book. In fact, many of these 
concepts are from other scientific and computing libraries that are more specialized, but that have been structured 
and developed on the basis of this library.

You saw how, thanks to ndarray, you can extend the functionalities of Python, making it a suitable language for 
scientific computing and data analysis.

Knowledge of NumPy is therefore crucial for anyone who wants to take on the world of data analysis.

The next chapter introduces a new library, called pandas, which is structured on NumPy and so encompasses all the 
basic concepts illustrated in this chapter. However, pandas extends these concepts so they are more suitable to 
data analysis.



